---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/arxiv-datas/quant-ph/2025/04/04/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---

# 2025-04-04 preprint by arxiv_tools


---
tags:
  - #quant-ph-2025-04-04
---



{ .block-language-dataview}

## collected

## not collected


### arXiv:2504.03180

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03180](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03180) 

Title:  Optical detection of charge defects near a graphene transistor using the Stark shift of fluorescent molecules

Authors:  Carlotta Ciancico, Iacopo Torre, Bernat Terrés, Alvaro Moreno, Robert Smit, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, Michel Orrit, Frank Koppens, Antoine Reserbat-Plantey, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Two-dimensional crystals and their heterostructures unlock access to a class of photonic devices, bringing nanophotonics from the nanometer scale down to the atomic level where quantum effects are relevant. Single-photon emitters (SPEs) are central in quantum photonics as quantum markers linked to their electrostatic, thermal, magnetic, or dielectric environment. This aspect is exciting in two-dimensional (2D) crystals and their heterostructures, where the environment can be abruptly modified through vertical stacking or lateral structuring, such as moiré or nano-patterned gates. To further develop 2D-based quantum photonic devices, there is a need for quantum markers that are capable of integration into various device geometries, and that can be read out individually, non-destructively, and without additional electrodes. Here, we show how to optically detect charge carrier accumulation using sub-GHz linewidth single-photon emitters coupled to a graphene device. We employ the single molecule Stark effect, sensitive to the electric fields generated by charge puddles, such as those at the graphene edge. The same approach enables dynamic sensing of electronic noise, and we demonstrate the optical read-out of low-frequency white noise in a biased graphene device. The approach described here can be further exploited to explore charge dynamics in 2D heterostructures using quantum emitter markers.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03192

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03192](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03192) 

Title:  A Survey of Quantum Transformers: Approaches, Advantages, Challenges, and Future Directions

Authors:  Hui Zhang, Qinglin Zhao, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Quantum Transformer models represent a significant research direction in quantum machine learning (QML), leveraging the parallelism and entanglement properties of quantum computing to overcome the computational complexity and expressive limitations of classical Transformers. Parameterized quantum circuit (PQC)-based Transformer models are the primary focus of current research, employing PQCs to achieve varying degrees of quantumization, including strategies such as QKV-only Quantum mapping, Quantum Pairwise Attention, Quantum Global Attention, and Quantum-Assisted Acceleration. These approaches are well-suited to Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices, demonstrating potential in small-scale tasks to reduce complexity or enhance performance. The strength of PQC-based methods lies in their compatibility with existing quantum hardware, positioning them as the main pathway toward the practical implementation of quantum Transformers. However, these methods face challenges such as limited scalability, the absence of standardized testing benchmarks, and the "barren plateau" problem during training. As a complementary approach, Quantum Linear Algebra (QLA)-based Transformer models rely on future fault-tolerant quantum computing, utilizing techniques like block-encoding and Quantum Singular Value Transformation (QSVT) to achieve efficient matrix operations and theoretically significant complexity reductions, though they remain in the theoretical exploration stage. Future research should prioritize optimizing PQC-based hybrid architectures and quantum global attention models, establishing unified evaluation frameworks, and addressing training difficulties, while also exploring hybrid PQC-QLA approaches to advance the development of quantum Transformers.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03227

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03227](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03227) 

Title:  Quantum Optimization-Based Route Compression for Efficient Navigation Systems

Authors:  Shunsuke Sotobayashi, Yuichiro Minato, Takao Tomono, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We present a novel quantum optimization-based route compression technique that significantly reduces storage requirements compared to conventional methods. Route optimization systems face critical challenges in efficiently storing selected routes, particularly under memory constraints. Our proposed method enhances route information compression rates by leveraging Higher Order Binary Optimization (HOBO), an extended formulation of Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) commonly employed in quantum approximate optimization algorithms (QAOA) for combinatorial optimization problems. We implemented HOBO on real world map data and conducted comparative analysis between the traditional Ramer-Douglas-Peucker (RDP) algorithm and our proposed method. Results demonstrate that our approach successfully identifies yielding improved compression efficiency that scales with data size from candidate routes. Experimental validation confirms the technique viability for practical applications in navigation systems where memory constraints are critical. The HOBO formulation allows for representation of complex route that would be difficult to capture using classical compression algorithms. Our implementation demonstrates up to 30% improvement in compression rates while maintaining route fidelity within acceptable navigation parameters. This approach opens new possibilities for implementing quantum inspired optimization in transportation systems, potentially providing more efficient navigation services. This work represents a significant advancement in applying quantum optimization principles to practical transportation challenges.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03237

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03237](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03237) 

Title:  Improved Strategies for Fermionic Quantum Simulation with Global Interactions

Authors:  Thierry N. Kaldenbach, Gabriel Breuil, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We present efficient quantum circuits for fermionic excitation operators tailored for ion trap quantum computers exhibiting the Mølmer-Sørensen (MS) gate. Such operators commonly arise in the study of static and dynamic properties in electronic structure problems using Unitary Coupled Cluster theory or Trotterized time evolution. We detail how the global MS interaction naturally suits the non-local structure of fermionic excitation operators under the Jordan-Wigner mapping and simultaneously provides optimal parallelism in their circuit decompositions. Compared to previous schemes on ion traps, our approach reduces the number of MS gates by factors of 2-, and 4, for single-, and double excitations, respectively. This improvement promises significant speedups and error reductions.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03247

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03247](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03247) 

Title:  Dynamically near-stable two-mode squeezing in optomechanical system

Authors:  Shi-fan Qi, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Bosonic two-mode squeezed states are paradigmatic entangled states with broad applications in quantum information processing and metrology. In this work, we propose a two-mode squeezing scheme within a hybrid three-mode cavity optomechanical system, wherein a mechanical resonator is coupled to two microwave (or optical) photon modes. By applying and modulating strong driving pulses to the photon modes, we construct an effective Hamiltonian that describes two-photon squeezing mediated by the mechanical mode. This effective Hamiltonian is validated through the diagonalization of the system's Liouvillian superoperator. With the effective Hamiltonian, we provide a rigorous theoretical solution for the dynamical process of squeezing generation within the open-quantum-system framework. Our analysis reveals that stable two-mode squeezing can be obtained by optimizing the squeezing quadrature operator, even in unstable system dynamics. Moreover, the squeezing level can surpass the maximum achievable under stable system conditions. Our work provides an extendable approach for generating two-mode squeezed states between indirectly coupled Gaussian modes.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03304

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03304](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03304) 

Title:  Hong-Ou-Mandel effect with two frequency-entangled photons of vastly different color

Authors:  Felix Mann, Helen M. Chrzanowski, Felipe Gewers, Marlon Placke, Sven Ramelow, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> In the original Hong-Ou-Mandel (HOM) experiment -- when two identical photons are incident upon the input ports of a balanced beam-splitter -- they coalesce, always leaving via the same output port. It is often interpreted that this interference arises due to the indistinguishability of the single photons; the situation, however, is often more nuanced. Here, we demonstrate an analog of HOM interference between two photons of completely different color. To do so, we utilize a quantum frequency converter based on sum- and difference-frequency generation as an `active' beam-splitter -- coupling frequency-entangled red and telecom single photons with an octave-spanning energy difference of 282 THz. This work presents the first demonstration of HOM interference between two single photons of distinctly different color, deepening our understanding of what underlies quantum interference. It also suggests a novel approach to interfacing photonic qubits in heterogeneous quantum systems where frequency conversion and quantum interference are unified.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03315

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03315](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03315) 

Title:  Detecting underdetermination in parameterized quantum circuits

Authors:  Marie Kempkes, Jakob Spiegelberg, Evert van Nieuwenburg, Vedran Dunjko, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> A central question in machine learning is how reliable the predictions of a trained model are. Reliability includes the identification of instances for which a model is likely not to be trusted based on an analysis of the learning system itself. Such unreliability for an input may arise from the model family providing a variety of hypotheses consistent with the training data, which can vastly disagree in their predictions on that particular input point. This is called the underdetermination problem, and it is important to develop methods to detect it. With the emergence of quantum machine learning (QML) as a prospective alternative to classical methods for certain learning problems, the question arises to what extent they are subject to underdetermination and whether similar techniques as those developed for classical models can be employed for its detection. In this work, we first provide an overview of concepts from Safe AI and reliability, which in particular received little attention in QML. We then explore the use of a method based on local second-order information for the detection of underdetermination in parameterized quantum circuits through numerical experiments. We further demonstrate that the approach is robust to certain levels of shot noise. Our work contributes to the body of literature on Safe Quantum AI, which is an emerging field of growing importance.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03332

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03332](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03332) 

Title:  A silicon spin vacuum: isotopically enriched $^{28}$silicon-on-insulator and $^{28}$silicon from ultra-high fluence ion implantation

Authors:  Shao Qi Lim, Brett C. Johnson, Sergey Rubanov, Nico Klingner, Bin Gong, Alexander M. Jakob, Danielle Holmes, David N. Jamieson, Jim S. Williams, Jeffrey C. McCallum, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Isotopically enriched silicon (Si) can greatly enhance qubit coherence times by minimizing naturally occurring $^{29}$Si which has a non-zero nuclear spin. Ultra-high fluence $^{28}$Si ion implantation of bulk natural Si substrates was recently demonstrated as an attractive technique to ultra-high $^{28}$Si isotopic purity. In this work, we apply this $^{28}$Si enrichment process to produce $^{28}$Si and $^{28}$Si-on-insulator (SOI) samples. Experimentally, we produced a $^{28}$Si sample on natural Si substrate with $^{29}$Si depleted to 7~ppm (limited by measurement noise floor), that is at least 100 nm thick. This is achieved with an ion energy that results in a sputter yield of less than one and a high ion fluence, as supported by simulations. Further, our simulations predict the $^{29}$Si and $^{30}$Si depletion in our sample to be less than 1~ppm. In the case of SOI, ion implantation conditions are found to be more stringent than those of bulk natural Si in terms of minimizing threading dislocations upon subsequent solid phase epitaxy annealing. Finally, we report the observation of nanoscopic voids in our $^{28}$SOI and $^{28}$Si samples located in the depth region between the surface and 70~nm. These voids appear to be stabilized by the presence of gold impurities and can be annealed out completely by a standard SPE annealing protocol at 620°C for 10 minutes in the absence of gold.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03344

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03344](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03344) 

Title:  Chiral environment effects on the dynamics of a central chiral molecule

Authors:  Daniel Martínez-Gil, Pedro Bargueño, Salvador Miret-Artés, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> In this work, we develop a system {\it plus} environment approach for interacting chiral molecules under a quantum-classical description of the spin-spin model using a Caldeira-Leggett-like coupling. After presenting the interacting model, we show that a long-ranged parity-nonconserving interaction, encoded within a non-linear Schrödinger equation, produces an energy difference between the two enantiomers of the central chiral molecule when it interacts with a chiral environment. Three examples of such interactions are considered, with particular focus on $Z^0$-photon vacuum polarization. Finally, we reveal a {\it chirality transmission effect} phenomenon, where the time-averaged population difference of the central molecule is amplified when the chiral asymmetry of the environment is considered.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03351

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03351](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03351) 

Title:  Non-stabilizerness and violations of CHSH inequalities

Authors:  Stefano Cusumano, Lorenzo Campos Venuti, Simone Cepollaro, Gianluca Esposito, Daniele Iannotti, Barbara Jasser, Jovan Odavi\' c, Michele Viscardi, Alioscia Hamma, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We study quantitatively the interplay between entanglement and non-stabilizer resources in violating the CHSH inequalities. We show that, while non-stabilizer resources are necessary, they must have a specific structure, namely they need to be both asymmetric and (surprisingly) local. We employ stabilizer entropy (SE) to quantify the non-stabilizer resources involved and the probability of violation given the resources. We show how spectral quantities related to the flatness of entanglement spectrum and its relationship with non-local SE affect the CHSH inequality. Finally, we utilize these results - together with tools from representation theory - to construct a systematic way of building ensembles of states with higher probability of violation.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03411

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03411](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03411) 

Title:  Competition of light- and phonon-dressing in microwave-dressed Bose polarons

Authors:  G. M. Koutentakis, S. I. Mistakidis, F. Grusdt, H. R. Sadeghpour, P. Schmelcher, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We theoretically investigate the stationary properties of a spin-1/2 impurity immersed in a one-dimensional confined Bose gas. In particular, we consider coherently coupled spin states with an external field, where only one spin component interacts with the bath, enabling light dressing of the impurity and spin-dependent bath-impurity interactions. Through detailed comparisons with ab-initio many-body simulations, we demonstrate that the composite system is accurately described by a simplified effective Hamiltonian. The latter builds upon previously developed effective potential approaches in the absence of light dressing. It can be used to extract the impurity energy, residue, effective mass, and anharmonicity induced by the phononic dressing. Light-dressing is shown to increase the polaron residue, undressing the impurity from phononic excitations because of strong spin coupling. For strong repulsions-previously shown to trigger dynamical Bose polaron decay (a phenomenon called temporal orthogonality catastrophe), it is explained that strong light-dressing stabilizes a repulsive polaron-dressed state. Our results establish the effective Hamiltonian framework as a powerful tool for exploring strongly interacting polaronic systems and corroborating forthcoming experimental realizations.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03426

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03426](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03426) 

Title:  Structured search algorithm: A quantum leap

Authors:  Yash Prabhat, Snigdha Thakur, Ankur Raina, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Grover's quantum search algorithm showcases the prowess of quantum algorithms, phenomenally reducing the complexity of the search operation of unsorted data. This letter advances Grover's algorithm using a structured search method to attain an unbounded search speed. Remarkably, only two Oracle calls are required to search any element in a dataset of size $2^n$, $n$ being an integer. The algorithm leverages a fixed point approach, iteratively identifying the solution state for multiple qubits at a time, progressively narrowing the search space. The experimental outcomes affirm the algorithm's performance by searching a bit string in 5TB of unsorted binary data on QPU IBM Kyiv. The letter also hypothesizes a scalable classical simulation of the said algorithm.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03429

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03429](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03429) 

Title:  Optimizing Quantum Circuits via ZX Diagrams using Reinforcement Learning and Graph Neural Networks

Authors:  Alexander Mattick, Maniraman Periyasamy, Christian Ufrecht, Abhishek Y. Dubey, Christopher Mutschler, Axel Plinge, Daniel D. Scherer, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Quantum computing is currently strongly limited by the impact of noise, in particular introduced by the application of two-qubit gates. For this reason, reducing the number of two-qubit gates is of paramount importance on noisy intermediate-scale quantum hardware. To advance towards more reliable quantum computing, we introduce a framework based on ZX calculus, graph-neural networks and reinforcement learning for quantum circuit optimization. By combining reinforcement learning and tree search, our method addresses the challenge of selecting optimal sequences of ZX calculus rewrite rules. Instead of relying on existing heuristic rules for minimizing circuits, our method trains a novel reinforcement learning policy that directly operates on ZX-graphs, therefore allowing us to search through the space of all possible circuit transformations to find a circuit significantly minimizing the number of CNOT gates. This way we can scale beyond hard-coded rules towards discovering arbitrary optimization rules. We demonstrate our method's competetiveness with state-of-the-art circuit optimizers and generalization capabilities on large sets of diverse random circuits.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03435

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03435](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03435) 

Title:  Exactly solvable models for universal operator growth

Authors:  Oleksandr Gamayun, Murtaza Ali Mir, Oleg Lychkovskiy, Zoran Ristivojevic, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Quantum observables of generic many-body systems exhibit a universal pattern of growth in the Krylov space of operators. This pattern becomes particularly manifest in the Lanczos basis, where the evolution superoperator assumes the tridiagonal form. According to the universal operator growth hypothesis, the nonzero elements of the superoperator, known as Lanczos coefficients, grow asymptotically linearly. We introduce and explore broad families of Lanczos coefficients that are consistent with the universal operator growth and lead to the exactly solvable dynamics. Within these families, the subleading terms of asymptotic expansion of the Lanczos sequence can be controlled and fine-tuned to produce diverse dynamical patterns. For one of the families, the Krylov complexity is computed exactly.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03452

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03452](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03452) 

Title:  Entanglement and local holography in quantum gravity

Authors:  Gabriel Wong, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> The It from Qubit paradigm proposes that gravitational spacetimes emerge from quantum entanglement. So far, the main evidence for this involves holographic dualities, where the entangled qubits live in a dual nongravitational theory. In this essay, we argue that string theory provides the mechanism to define these entangled qubits in the bulk gravitating theory. This involves a local form of geometric transition, which is the stringy mechanism that underlies \emph{local} holography. We illustrate how this works in the A model topological string,
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03458

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03458](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03458) 

Title:  Graph theory and tunable slow dynamics in quantum East Hamiltonians

Authors:  Heiko Georg Menzler, Mari Carmen Bañuls, Fabian Heidrich-Meisner, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We show how graph theory concepts can provide an insight into the origin of slow dynamics in systems with kinetic constraints. In particular, we observe that slow dynamics is related to the presence of strong hierarchies between nodes on the Fock-space graph in the particle occupation basis, which encodes configurations connected by a given Hamiltonian. To quantify hierarchical structures, we develop a measure of centrality of the nodes, which is applicable to generic Hamiltonian matrices and inspired by established centrality measures from graph theory. We illustrate these ideas in the quantum East (QE) model. We introduce several ways of detuning nodes in the corresponding graph that alter the hierarchical structure, defining a family of QE models. We numerically demonstrate how these detunings affect the degree of non-ergodicity on finite systems, as evidenced by both the time dependence of density autocorrelations and eigenstate properties in the detuned QE models.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03465

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03465](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03465) 

Title:  Dividing and Conquering the Van Vleck Catastrophe

Authors:  Sophia Simon, Gian-Luca R. Anselmetti, Raffaele Santagati, Matthias Degroote, Nikolaj Moll, Michael Streif, Nathan Wiebe, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> The quantum-computational cost of determining ground state energies through quantum phase estimation depends on the overlap between an easily preparable initial state and the targeted ground state. The Van Vleck orthogonality catastrophe has frequently been invoked to suggest that quantum computers may not be able to efficiently prepare ground states of large systems because the overlap with the initial state tends to decrease exponentially with the system size, even for non-interacting systems. We show that this intuition is not necessarily true. Specifically, we introduce a divide-and-conquer strategy that repeatedly uses phase estimation to merge ground states of increasingly larger subsystems. We provide rigorous bounds for this approach and show that if the minimum success probability of each merge is lower bounded by a constant, then the query complexity of preparing the ground state of $N$ interacting systems is in $O(N^{\log\log(N)} {\rm poly}(N))$, which is quasi-polynomial in $N$, in contrast to the exponential scaling anticipated by the Van Vleck catastrophe. We also discuss sufficient conditions on the Hamiltonian that ensure a quasi-polynomial running time.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03472

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03472](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03472) 

Title:  Quantum conditional mutual information as a probe of measurement-induced entanglement phase transitions

Authors:  Yuichi Otsuka, Kazuhiro Seki, Seiji Yunoki, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We propose that the quantum conditional mutual information (QCMI), computed with a suitably chosen partition of the system, serves as a powerful probe for detecting measurement-induced entanglement phase transitions in monitored quantum circuits. To demonstrate this, we investigate monitored variable-range Clifford circuits and identify the phase boundary between volume-law and area-law entanglement phases by performing finite-size scaling analyses of the QCMI. Assuming that the entanglement entropy exhibits a logarithmic dependence on system size at criticality in short-range interacting cases, we further show that the QCMI allows for the simultaneous determination of both the critical point and the universal coefficient of the logarithmic term in the entanglement entropy via a crossing-point analysis. For the shortest-range interacting case studied, we obtain the thermodynamic-limit value of the coefficient as $\tilde{c}=1.519(3)$, which is significantly smaller than values reported in previous studies.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03475

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03475](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03475) 

Title:  An all-fibred, telecom technology compatible, room temperature, single-photon source

Authors:  Nathan Lecaron, Max Meunier, Grégory Sauder, Romain Dalidet, Yoann Pelet, Sébastien Tanzilli, Jesus Zuniga-Pérez, Olivier Alibart, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Single photon sources are essential building blocks for fundamental quantum optics but also for quantum information networks. Their widespread is currently hindered by unpractical features, such as operation at cryogenic temperature and emission wavelength lying outside telecom windows. Taking advantage of telecom technology and point defects in GaN crystals, we present, for the first time, the development of a fully-fibred source of single photons operating at room temperature, emitting photons in the telecom O-band and fulfilling the standards of telecom photonics. We characterise an emitter producting single photons at the wavelength of 1292\,nm, a spectral broadening compatible with CWDM channels of 13\,nm, and a brightness of 25 kcps per mW of pump power. The source shows a signal-to-noise ratio of 16.5 and an autocorrelation degree (purity) of 0,059 at room temperature, showing high potential for being integrated transportable quantum cryptography devices.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03481

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03481](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03481) 

Title:  Native-oxide-passivated trilayer junctions for superconducting qubits

Authors:  Pankaj Sethi, Om Prakash, Jukka-Pekka Kaikkonen, Mikael Kervinen, Elsa T. Mannila, Mário Ribeiro, Debopam Datta, Christopher W. Förbom, Jorden Senior, Renan P. Loreto, Joel Hätinen, Klaara Viisanen, Jukka I. Väyrynen, Alberto Ronzani, Antti Kemppinen, Visa Vesterinen, Mika Prunnila, Joonas Govenius, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Superconducting qubits in today's quantum processing units are typically fabricated with angle-evaporated aluminum--aluminum-oxide--aluminum Josephson junctions. However, there is an urgent need to overcome the limited reproducibility of this approach when scaling up the number of qubits and junctions. Fabrication methods based on subtractive patterning of superconductor--insulator--superconductor trilayers, used for more classical large-scale Josephson junction circuits, could provide the solution but they in turn often suffer from lossy dielectrics incompatible with high qubit coherence. In this work, we utilize native aluminum oxide as a sidewall passivation layer for junctions based on aluminum--aluminum-oxide--niobium trilayers, and use such junctions in qubits. We design the fabrication process such that the few-nanometer-thin native oxide is not exposed to oxide removal steps that could increase its defect density or hinder its ability to prevent shorting between the leads of the junction. With these junctions, we design and fabricate transmon-like qubits and measure time-averaged coherence times up to 30 $μ$s at a qubit frequency of 5 GHz, corresponding to a qubit quality factor of one million. Our process uses subtractive patterning and optical lithography on wafer scale, enabling high throughput in patterning. This approach provides a scalable path toward fabrication of superconducting qubits on industry-standard platforms.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03482

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03482](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03482) 

Title:  Supersolid phase in two-dimensional soft-core bosons at finite temperature

Authors:  Sebastiano Peotta, Gabriele Spada, Stefano Giorgini, Sebastiano Pilati, Alessio Recati, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> The supersolid phase of soft-core bosons in two dimensions is investigated using the self-consistent Hartree-Fock and quantum Monte Carlo methods. An approximate phase diagram at finite temperatures is initially constructed using the mean-field approach, which is subsequently validated through precise path-integral simulations, enabling a microscopic characterization of the various phases. Superfluid and melting/freezing transitions are analyzed through the superfluid density and the long-range behavior of correlation functions associated with positional and orientational order, in accordance with the general picture of Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transitions. A broad region at low temperatures is identified where the supersolid phase exists, separating the uniform superfluid phase from the normal quasi-crystal phase. Additionally, a potential intermediate hexatic phase with quasi long-range orientational order is identified in a narrow region between the normal solid and fluid phases. These findings establish self-consistent Hartree-Fock theory beyond the local density approximation as an effective tool, complementary to computationally intensive quantum Monte Carlo simulations, for investigating the melting of the supersolid phase and the possible emergence of the hexatic superfluid phase in bosonic systems with various interaction potentials.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03504

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03504](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03504) 

Title:  Reducing quantum error correction overhead using soft information

Authors:  Joonas Majaniemi, Elisha S. Matekole, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Imperfect measurements are a prevalent source of error across quantum computing platforms, significantly degrading the logical error rates achievable on current hardware. To mitigate this issue, rich measurement data referred to as soft information has been proposed to efficiently identify and correct measurement errors as they occur. In this work, we model soft information decoding across a variety of physical qubit platforms and decoders and showcase how soft information can make error correction viable at lower code distances and higher physical error rates than is otherwise possible. We simulate the effects of soft information decoding on quantum memories for surface codes and bivariate bicycle codes, and evaluate the error suppression performance of soft decoders against traditional decoders. For near-term devices with noise regimes close to the surface code threshold, our simulations show that soft information decoding can provide up to 10% higher error suppression on superconducting qubits and up to 20% stronger error suppression on neutral atom qubits.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03507

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03507](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03507) 

Title:  Squeezing light with optomechanical and spin-light quantum interfaces

Authors:  Gian-Luca Schmid, Manel Bosch Aguilera, Chun Tat Ngai, Maryse Ernzer, Luiz Couto Correa Pinto Filho, Dennis Høj, Ulrik Lund Andersen, Florian Goschin, Philipp Treutlein, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We investigate squeezing of light through quantum-noise-limited interactions with two different material systems: an ultracold atomic spin ensemble and a micromechanical membrane. Both systems feature a light-matter quantum interface that we exploit, respectively, to generate polarization squeezing of light through Faraday interaction with the collective atomic spin precession, and ponderomotive quadrature squeezing of light through radiation pressure interaction with the membrane vibrations in an optical cavity. Both experiments are described in a common theoretical framework, highlighting the conceptual similarities between them. The observation of squeezing certifies light-matter coupling with large quantum cooperativity, a prerequisite for applications in quantum science and technology. In our experiments, we obtain a maximal cooperativity of $C_\mathrm{qu} =10$ for the spin and $C_\mathrm{qu} = 9$ for the membrane. In particular, our results pave the way for hybrid quantum systems where spin and mechanical degrees of freedom are coherently coupled via light, enabling new protocols for quantum state transfer and entanglement generation over macroscopic distances.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03512

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03512](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03512) 

Title:  Independent e- and m-anyon confinement in the parallel field toric code on non-square lattices

Authors:  Simon M. Linsel, Lode Pollet, Fabian Grusdt, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Kitaev's toric code has become one of the most studied models in physics and is highly relevant to the fields of both quantum error correction and condensed matter physics. Most notably, it is the simplest known model hosting an extended, deconfined topological bulk phase. To this day, it remains challenging to reliably and robustly probe topological phases, as many state-of-the-art order parameters are sensitive to specific models and even specific parameter regimes. With the emergence of powerful quantum simulators which are approaching the regimes of topological bulk phases, there is a timely need for experimentally accessible order parameters. Here we study the ground state physics of the parallel field toric code on the honeycomb, triangular and cubic lattices using continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo. By extending the concept of experimentally accessible percolation-inspired order parameters (POPs) we show that electric and magnetic anyons are independently confined on the honeycomb and triangular lattices, unlike on the square lattice. Our work manifestly demonstrates that, even in the ground state, we must make a distinction between topological order and \mbox{(de-)confinement}. Moreover, we report multi-critical points in the aforementioned confinement phase diagrams. Finally, we map out the topological phase diagrams on the honeycomb, triangular and cubic lattices and compare the performance of the POPs with other topological order parameters. Our work paves the way for studies of confinement involving dynamical matter and the associated multi-critical points in contemporary quantum simulation platforms for $\mathbb{Z}_2$ lattice gauge theories.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03527

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03527](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03527) 

Title:  Wave-particle duality of gravitational radiation

Authors:  Hudson A. Loughlin, Germain Tobar, Evan D. Hall, Vivishek Sudhir, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We study the continuous quantum measurement of gravitational radiation. This is typically done by coupling the radiation to a meter, such as a resonant mass detector or an interferometer, which is subsequently read out by a detector. We find that the detector employed determines whether the gravitational field exhibits wave or particle characteristics. A linear detector, such as a homodyne detector, yields no signal for a field in a Fock state and a signal proportional to the amplitude of a field in a coherent state. Such a linear detector thus supports a wave-like interpretation. By contrast, the signal from a detector coupled to the meter's energy is non-zero only when the incident radiation contains at least a single graviton, resulting in a quantum jump in energy equal to the energy of the absorbed graviton. Our results extend the principle of complementarity to quantized gravitational radiation, demonstrating the detector dependence of the graviton, and indicates that conceptually simple modifications to gravitational-wave detectors can make them graviton counters.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03528

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03528](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03528) 

Title:  Observation of Temperature Effects in False Vacuum Decay

Authors:  Riccardo Cominotti, Cosetta Baroni, Chiara Rogora, Diego Andreoni, Giacomo Guarda, Giacomo Lamporesi, Gabriele Ferrari, Alessandro Zenesini, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Metastability is a phenomenon encountered in many different physical systems, ranging from chemical reactions to magnetic structures. The characteristic decay timescale from a metastable to a stable state is not always straightforward to estimate since it depends on the microscopic details of the system. A paradigmatic example in quantum field theories is the decay of the false vacuum, manifested via the nucleation of bubbles. In this paper, we measure the temperature dependence of the timescale for the false vacuum decay mechanism in an ultracold atomic quantum spin mixture which exhibits ferromagnetic properties. Our results show that the false vacuum decay rate scales with temperature as predicted by the finite-temperature extension of the instanton theory, and confirm atomic systems as an ideal platform where to study out-of-equilibrium field theories.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03529

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03529](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03529) 

Title:  PHOENIX: Pauli-Based High-Level Optimization Engine for Instruction Execution on NISQ Devices

Authors:  Zhaohui Yang, Dawei Ding, Chenghong Zhu, Jianxin Chen, Yuan Xie, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Variational quantum algorithms (VQA) based on Hamiltonian simulation represent a specialized class of quantum programs well-suited for near-term quantum computing applications due to its modest resource requirements in terms of qubits and circuit depth. Unlike the conventional single-qubit (1Q) and two-qubit (2Q) gate sequence representation, Hamiltonian simulation programs are essentially composed of disciplined subroutines known as Pauli exponentiations (Pauli strings with coefficients) that are variably arranged. To capitalize on these distinct program features, this study introduces PHOENIX, a highly effective compilation framework that primarily operates at the high-level Pauli-based intermediate representation (IR) for generic Hamiltonian simulation programs. PHOENIX exploits global program optimization opportunities to the greatest extent, compared to existing SOTA methods despite some of them also utilizing similar IRs. PHOENIX employs the binary symplectic form (BSF) to formally describe Pauli strings and reformulates IR synthesis as reducing the column weights of BSF by appropriate Clifford transformations. It comes with a heuristic BSF simplification algorithm that searches for the most appropriate 2Q Clifford operators in sequence to maximally simplify the BSF at each step, until the BSF can be directly synthesized by basic 1Q and 2Q gates. PHOENIX further performs a global ordering strategy in a Tetris-like fashion for these simplified IR groups, carefully balancing optimization opportunities for gate cancellation, minimizing circuit depth, and managing qubit routing overhead. Experimental results demonstrate that PHOENIX outperforms SOTA VQA compilers across diverse program categories, backend ISAs, and hardware topologies.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03556

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03556](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03556) 

Title:  Minimally Universal Parity Quantum Computing

Authors:  Isaac D. Smith, Berend Klaver, Hendrik Poulsen Nautrup, Wolfgang Lechner, Hans J. Briegel, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> In parity quantum computing, multi-qubit logical gates are implemented by single-qubit rotations on a suitably encoded state involving auxiliary qubits. Consequently, there is a correspondence between qubit count and the size of the native gate set. One might then wonder: what is the smallest number of auxiliary qubits that still allows for universal parity computing? Here, we demonstrate that the answer is one, if the number of logical qubits is even, and two otherwise. Furthermore, we present a sufficient condition for a given parity gate set to be universal. This leads to a variety of different universal parity gate sets corresponding to different numbers of auxiliary qubits, and more generally contributes to the understanding of which entangling gates are required to augment the set of single-qubit unitaries to perform universal quantum computing. As a consequence, we obtain (i) minimal implementations of the parity framework on e.g., a triangular lattice, (ii) hardware specific implementations of the parity flow framework on e.g., a heavy-hex lattice, and (iii) novel universal resources for measurement-based quantum computation (MBQC).
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03584

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03584](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03584) 

Title:  Variational Quantum Self-Organizing Map

Authors:  Amol Deshmukh, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We propose a novel quantum neural network architecture for unsupervised learning of classical and quantum data based on the kernelized version of Kohonen's self-organizing map. The central idea behind our algorithm is to replace the Euclidean distance metric with the fidelity between quantum states to identify the best matching unit from the low-dimensional grid of output neurons in the self-organizing map. The fidelities between the unknown quantum state and the quantum states containing the variational parameters are estimated by computing the transition probability on a quantum computer. The estimated fidelities are in turn used to adjust the variational parameters of the output neurons. Unlike $\mathcal{O}(N^{2})$ circuit evaluations needed in quantum kernel estimation, our algorithm requires $\mathcal{O}(N)$ circuit evaluations for $N$ data samples. Analogous to the classical version of the self-organizing map, our algorithm learns a mapping from a high-dimensional Hilbert space to a low-dimensional grid of lattice points while preserving the underlying topology of the Hilbert space. We showcase the effectiveness of our algorithm by constructing a two-dimensional visualization that accurately differentiates between the three distinct species of flowers in Fisher's Iris dataset. In addition, we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on quantum data by creating a two-dimensional map that preserves the topology of the state space in the Schwinger model and distinguishes between the two separate phases of the model at $θ= π$.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03599

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03599](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03599) 

Title:  Optical high harmonic generation in Dirac materials

Authors:  S. Rakhmanov, K. Matchonov, H. Yusupov, K. Nasriddinov, D. Matrasulov, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We study high-order harmonic generation by optically driven one- and two-dimensional hydrogenlike atoms formed by Coulomb imurities in graphene. The time-dependent Dirac equations with Coulomb plus time-periodic monochromatic field potentials are solved for both cases. Such characteristics of the optical high harmonic generation, as average dipole moment and high harmonic generation spectra, are computed. A sketch for table-top experimental realization of the considered models is proposed.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03620

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03620](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03620) 

Title:  Quantum Search with In-Place Queries

Authors:  Blake Holman, Ronak Ramachandran, Justin Yirka, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Quantum query complexity is typically characterized in terms of XOR queries |x,y> to |x,y+f(x)> or phase queries, which ensure that even queries to non-invertible functions are unitary. When querying a permutation, another natural model is unitary: in-place queries |x> to |f(x)>.
  Some problems are known to require exponentially fewer in-place queries than XOR queries, but no separation has been shown in the opposite direction. A candidate for such a separation was the problem of inverting a permutation over N elements. This task, equivalent to unstructured search in the context of permutations, is solvable with $O(\sqrt{N})$ XOR queries but was conjectured to require $Ω(N)$ in-place queries.
  We refute this conjecture by designing a quantum algorithm for Permutation Inversion using $O(\sqrt{N})$ in-place queries. Our algorithm achieves the same speedup as Grover's algorithm despite the inability to efficiently uncompute queries or perform straightforward oracle-controlled reflections.
  Nonetheless, we show that there are indeed problems which require fewer XOR queries than in-place queries. We introduce a subspace-conversion problem called Function Erasure that requires 1 XOR query and $Θ(\sqrt{N})$ in-place queries. Then, we build on a recent extension of the quantum adversary method to characterize exact conditions for a decision problem to exhibit such a separation, and we propose a candidate problem.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03626

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03626](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03626) 

Title:  Quantum Speedups for Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods with Application to Optimization

Authors:  Guneykan Ozgul, Xiantao Li, Mehrdad Mahdavi, Chunhao Wang, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> We propose quantum algorithms that provide provable speedups for Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods commonly used for sampling from probability distributions of the form $π\propto e^{-f}$, where $f$ is a potential function. Our first approach considers Gibbs sampling for finite-sum potentials in the stochastic setting, employing an oracle that provides gradients of individual functions. In the second setting, we consider access only to a stochastic evaluation oracle, allowing simultaneous queries at two points of the potential function under the same stochastic parameter. By introducing novel techniques for stochastic gradient estimation, our algorithms improve the gradient and evaluation complexities of classical samplers, such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) and Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) in terms of dimension, precision, and other problem-dependent parameters. Furthermore, we achieve quantum speedups in optimization, particularly for minimizing non-smooth and approximately convex functions that commonly appear in empirical risk minimization problems.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03634

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03634](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03634) 

Title:  Maximal Entropy Formalism and the Restricted Boltzmann Machine

Authors:  Vinit Singh, Rishabh Gupta, Manas Sajjan, Francoise Remacle, Raphael D. Levine, Sabre Kais, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> The connection between the Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) formalism and Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) is natural, as both give rise to a Boltzmann-like distribution with constraints enforced by Lagrange multipliers, which corresponds to RBM parameters. We integrate RBMs into quantum state tomography (QST) by using them as probabilistic models to approximate quantum states while satisfying MaxEnt constraints. Additionally, we employ polynomially efficient quantum sampling techniques to enhance RBM training, enabling scalable and high-fidelity quantum state reconstruction. This approach provides a computationally efficient framework for applying RBMs to MaxEnt-based quantum tomography. Furthermore, our method applies to the general and previously unaddressed case of reconstructing arbitrary mixed quantum states from incomplete and potentially non-commuting sets of expectations of observables while still ensuring maximal entropy.
        △ Less



### arXiv:2504.03638

Links:

- [ ] [arXiv:2504.03638](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.03638) 

Title:  Noise constraints on sensitivity scaling in super-Heisenberg quantum metrology

Authors:  Noah Lordi, John Drew Wilson, Murray J. Holland, Joshua Combes, 

Abstract: 
> [!quote]- Abstract
> Quantum-enhanced metrology surpasses classical metrology by improving estimation precision scaling with a resource $N$ (e.g., particle number or energy) from $1/\sqrt{N}$ to $1/N$. Through the use of nonlinear effects, Roy and Braunstein~\cite{Roy2008} derived a $1/2^N$ scaling. However, later works argued this exponential improvement is unphysical and that even modest gains, like $1/N^2$, may vanish under noise. We show that, in the presence of small errors, the nonlinear interactions enabling metrological enhancement induce emergent errors. The errors propagate through the sensing protocol and are magnified proportional to any intended non-linear enhancement. We identify a critical value of the parameter to be estimated, for a fixed error, below which the emergent errors can be avoided.
        △ Less


